
<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# MSETools

<!-- badges: start -->

[![Lifecycle:
experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/lifecycle-experimental-orange.svg)](https://lifecycle.r-lib.org/articles/stages.html#experimental)
<!-- badges: end -->

This repository contains all of the code and analyses for the paper
titled “On the Reliability of Multiple Systems Estimation for the
Quantification of Modern Slavery” (Binette and Steorts, 2021). Its
structure is described below:

-   The R package **MSETools** provides a unified interface to multiple
    systems estimation (MSE) software. It implements best usage
    practices and computational speedups. Data from multiple system
    estimation studies of human trafficking has been reproduced for
    illustrations and analyses.

-   The **analyses** folder contains the analyses and figure for Binette
    and Steorts (2021). Each analysis is provided as an Rmd document
    which can be knitted on any platform using the included cache.
    Figures are automatically saved in png and pdf format into
    subfolders. Cache can be regenerated by knitting the Rmd documents
    on computing clusters using SLURM.

## Installation

You can install the development version from
[GitHub](https://github.com/) with:

``` r
# install.packages("devtools")
devtools::install_github("OlivierBinette/MSETools")
```

## Summary

### Implemented models

-   **dga:** The `dga()` function provides an interface to the `dga`
    package of Lum, Johndrow and Ball (2015), here re-implemented using
    Rcpp and extended to allow more flexible priors as well as Bayesian
    fractional posterior distributions. The package implements
    decomposable graphical models with hyper-Dirichlet priors and
    Bayesian model averaging.
-   **LCMCR:** The `lcmcr()` function provides an interface to the
    `LCMCR` package of Manrique-Vallier (2020), which implements the
    latent class model of Manrique-Vallier (2016). By default,
    **MSETools** initializes 500 parallel MCMC chains to provide
    cross-replication stability – this is necessary since the LCMCR
    Gibbs sampler fails to converge in some cases. Convergence
    diagnostics are available through `MSETools::diagnostics()`.
-   **SparseMSE:** The `sparsemse()` function provides an interface to
    the `SparseMSE` package of Chan, Silverman and Vincent (2019), which
    implements a Poisson log-linear approach with stepwise model
    selection and bootstrap confidence intervals. An option has been
    added to parallelize bootstrap replications across available cores.

### Helper functions

-   `estimates()` computes point estimates and confidence intervals for
    a list of models.
-   `batch.estimates()` compute estimates as a slurm job array (for use
    in a cluster).
-   `summary()` provides a result summary of fitted models.
-   `diagnostics()` provides convergence diagnostics for `lcmcr`
    objects.

### Datasets

See Binette and Steorts (2021) for a description of the datasets
reproduced herein.

## Examples

``` r
library(MSETools)
```

Define a list of models fitted to the UK dataset:

``` r
models = list(lcmcr(UK), sparsemse(UK), dga(UK), independence(UK))
```

Compute estimates:

``` r
estimates(models)
#> [[1]]
#>    N.hat    N.lwr    N.upr 
#> 20232.00 10934.95 32842.27 
#> 
#> [[2]]
#>     N.hat     N.lwr     N.upr 
#> 11312.990  9232.646 15042.869 
#> 
#> [[3]]
#> N.hat N.lwr N.upr 
#> 23016 10408 33481 
#> 
#> [[4]]
#>    N.hat    N.lwr    N.upr 
#> 13444.13 12004.03 15160.33
```

Parallelize on a computing cluster:

``` r
batch.estimates(models, njobs=4)
```

## References

-   Binette, O. and Steorts, Rebecca C. (2021) On the Reliability of
    Multiple Systems Estimation for the Quantification of Modern
    Slavery.
-   Lax Chan, Bernard Silverman and Kyle Vincent (2019). SparseMSE:
    ‘Multiple Systems Estimation for Sparse Capture Data’. R package
    version 2.0.1. <https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=SparseMSE>
-   James Johndrow, Kristian Lum and Patrick Ball (2021). dga:
    Capture-Recapture Estimation using Bayesian Model Averaging. R
    package version 2.0.1. <https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=dga>
-   Daniel Manrique-Vallier (2020). LCMCR: Bayesian Non-Parametric
    Latent-Class Capture-Recapture. R package version 0.4.11.
    <https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=LCMCR>
